![Robin Lovelace, 2021](man/images/feature_image.png)

<br>

Motor traffic-centric perspectives dominate road infrastructure planning
\[@Parkin2018\]. Yet, other (active) travel modes, such as cycling and
walking, have been found to bring an array of benefits: improved mental
and physical health, decarbonisation, as well as being more efficient in
terms of space (i.e., requires less space) \[@Parkin2018\]. Indeed, in
the post-pandemic world, active travel will likely become even more
important due to reduced public transport capacities, as highlighted by
the Department for Transport’s £250m Active Travel Fund (ATF) and £2b
allocated to walking and cycling over the next 5 years in the UK alone.
Thus, new policies and investment programs, such as the ATF, have led to
increased demand for local evidence to inform interventions ranging from
new cycleways to improved pavement quality.

Therefore, acknowledging the increasing demand for local evidence to
inform decision-making, the project will utilise two datasets -
OpenStreetMap (OSM) and Ordnance Survey Open Roads (OSOR) – to explore
how open datasets can be used to understand, prioritise, and design
active travel infrastructure. The overall aim of the project is to
understand the use of OSM data for transport planning, which has the
potential to lead to more inclusive and accessible evidence-based
decision-making due to its crowdsourced nature.

Methodologically, the project builds on geographic data science[1] and
previous studies assessing open datasets for transport applications
\[@Ferster\_etal2020; @Haklay2010\] and the experiences of lead
supervisor (e.g., developing *osmextract* package in R) and PhD student
Caroline Tait (who developed a *CycleInfraLnd* package in R) to develop
a new package in R for downloading, processing, and adding value to
transport datasets. To maximise the policy relevance and impact, the
outputs of the project will be disseminated nationwide with the support
of external partners (Department for Transport, The Open Innovation
Team)[2].

<br>

### Team

Supervisors: Robin Lovelace, Ed Manley, Victoria Houlden

Intern: Greta Timaite

## Bibliography

Ferster, Colin, Jaimy Fischer, Kevin Manaugh, Trisalyn Nelson, and
Meghan Winters. 2020. “Using OpenStreetMap to Inventory Bicycle
Infrastructure: A Comparison with Open Data from Cities.” *International
Journal of Sustainable Transportation* 14 (1): 64–73.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2018.1519746>.

Gilardi, Andrea, and Robin Lovelace. 2021. “Osmextract: Download and
Import Open Street Map Data Extracts. R Package Version 0.3.1.”

Haklay, Mordechai. 2010. “How Good Is Volunteered Geographical
Information? A Comparative Study of OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey
Datasets.” *Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design* 37 (4):
682–703. <https://doi.org/10.1068/b35097>.

Orozco, Luis Guillermo Natera, Federico Battiston, Gerardo Iñiguez, and
Michael Szell. 2020. “Data-Driven Strategies for Optimal Bicycle Network
Growth.” *Royal Society Open Science* 7 (12): 201130.
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.201130>.

Parkin, John. 2018. *Designing for Cycle Traffic: International
Principles and Practice*. London: ICE Publishing.

Tait, Caroline, and Robin Lovelace. 2021. “CycleInfraLnd: Accesses and
Download Data from the Transport for London Cycling Infrastructure
Database into R as Spatial Data (Simple Features). R Package Version
0.1.0.”

[1] Importantly, even though active travel research is
multi-disciplinary, it has received little attention from data science,
with Orozco et al.’s (2020) paper on modelling cycle network growth
providing a notable exception.

[2] If you wish to learn more about the project, visit [project’s
repository](https://github.com/udsleeds/openinfra) on GitHub:
<https://github.com/udsleeds/openinfra>
